Prognosis depends heavily on etiology and initial
hemodynamic presentation.
Lymphocytic myocarditis carries the most favorable prognosis
— 50 to 60 percent achieve full
myocardial recovery.
Giant cell myocarditis has the worst outcomes,
with median survival under 6 months without
transplantation.
Key clinical takeaways: maintain a high index
of suspicion in young patients with chest
pain and new ECG changes; CMR is
the non-invasive diagnostic standard; fulminant presentations require
immediate MCS — do not delay; and
activity restriction is mandatory during the inflammatory
phase.
Early recognition and guideline-directed therapy are essential
to preventing irreversible myocardial damage.